---
title:  "The Great Pyramid 'mystery solved' or two Great Problems that continue to plague 
archaeoastronomical claims?"
date:   2018-04-19 12:00:00
categories: [jekyll]
tags: [jekyll]
---

Archaeoastronomy was [recently in the news](https://www.dailymail.co.uk/sciencetech/article-5413253/Secret-Great-Pyramids-near-perfect-alignment-revealed.html) with a paper that supposedly solved “the secret 
behind the peculiar alignment of the Great Pyramid”. The news articles going around, for 
once, actually do a good job at describing the nature of the research paper, written by 
Glen Dash, and they even provide a link to the academic paper – which was published in _The
 Journal of Ancient Egyptian Architecture_, vol.2 in 2017, and can be downloaded for free 
 [here](http://www.egyptian-architecture.com/JAEA2/JAEA2_Dash). Unfortunately, it’s not a case of the media stepping up the way they describe 
 complex academic topics, but of a poorly argued paper.

The author sets off to test one hypothesis for the alignments of the Fourth Dynasty 
Ancient Egyptian pyramids, structures that are well-known for being very accurately placed
 and orientated so that their faces match the cardinal points (e.g. [Lehner 2008](https://archive.org/details/MarkLehner.......TheCompletePyramids)). This 
 feature continues unto the Fifth Dynasty when the Pyramid Texts first appear, and which 
 help us understand the reason for this. The entrance to the pyramids’ inner chamber, 
 where the King’s body was laid to rest, was located on its north face so that the King’s 
 spirit would depart his dead body and ascend to the northern sky to become one with the 
 _imperishable stars_ – what today we call circumpolar stars, stars that never rise nor set 
 and, hence, are visible every night throughout the year – something that is made clear in
  the so-called King’s Ascension myth, though clouded in the theology and cosmology of its
   time (e.g. Faulkner 1966, Brady 2012).

But the question Dash addresses, as so many before him did, is not _why_ the pyramids are 
orientated in this way, but _how_. How could the ancient Egyptians achieve such high degrees
 of accuracy? For scale, consider that the Great Pyramid is off an exact 
 North-South-East-West alignment by a mere 3’: that’s 3 arcminutes or 0.05 degrees. That’s
  roughly the perceived width of two stacked birthday cards (1mm) when held at arm’s 
  length – a pretty small error.


## Dash’s Method
In his concise introduction Dash remarks that four candidate methods ‘have been tested and
 found workable’ (p.1), namely Flinders Petrie’s pole star method, Joseph Dorner’s 
 circumpolar star method, Kate Spence’s simultaneous transit method and Martin Isler’s 
 gnomon shadow method. Dash, however, sets out to test a fifth method which, according to 
 him, was previously thought not to allow for the required accuracy to be achieved: the 
 equinoctial solar gnomon method.

This is a specific case of the gnomon shadow method, where a straight rod (the gnomon) is 
placed vertically and the shadow cast by it from sunrise to sunset observed and marked. 
From its trajectory a perfectly-oriented East-West line can be extracted. The equinoctial 
variant involves doing pretty much the same but on the days of the equinox (usually March 
20 and September 22). On these specific days, the path made by the tip of the gnomon’s 
shadow makes not a parabola but a line going straight from West to East.

To empirically test the accuracy of this method, Dash created an experimental setup and, 
on a single trial, found it to have a mean error of 7.3’, close to the mean level of 
accuracy of three of the Egyptian pyramids.

 Figure 1 goes here

A lot can be said about this. For example, that more trials are needed. On September 22nd,
 2016, the day Dash did his experiment, the sun rose 3’ off true East and set 8’ off true 
 West, not far from his mean error; but on March 20th, 2017 – the following equinox – it 
 would have risen 0.47’ off true East and set 12.5’ off true West. How much error would 
 his experimental setup give then? The sun doesn’t rise nor set exactly at East and West 
 every equinox, it is always slightly off, and this offset induces an error in the 
 equinoctial solar gnomon method. Furthermore, what if the exact date of the equinox was 
 missed? If Dash had run his experiment the following day (September 23rd, 2016) the sun 
 would have risen 20’ off East and set 32’ off West. How much deviation from a true 
 East-West direction would he have measured then?

Dash has certainly demonstrated that the method _can be_ accurate to within 7’ – but not 
that the method _is always_ that accurate. Was the reported level of accuracy due to sheer 
luck? A method might have high accuracy but low precision, meaning that under subsequent 
trials the range of values obtained might vary considerably. More trials are needed to 
explore the full range of equinoctial sunrises and sunsets, as well as how much 
variability there is around the day of the equinox, and therefore obtain a better grasp of
 the sources of uncertainty in the experimental setup. Since he has already developed the 
 experimental setup I would encourage him to run more trials and fully report his findings.


## Underlying Assumptions
But what I would like to focus on are the underlying assumptions that the equinoctial 
gnomon method requires. The first assumption is obvious: that the society in question were
 aware of the properties of a shadow cast by a gnomon. Gnomons are known from a variety of
  societies across different time periods. For Ancient Egypt in particular, [Martin Isler 
  (1991)](http://www.jstor.org/stable/40000578) has made a case for the gnomon with recourse to Egyptian iconography and 
  associated descriptions. [Sarah Symons (1999)](https://lra.le.ac.uk/handle/2381/8546) has further extended this by looking at 
  Ancient Egyptian sundials, which are but complex gnomons.

Another requirement to the application of Dash’s method is that one does so at the day of 
the equinox. This involves three further assumptions: firstly, that the society in 
question conceived of the equinox; secondly, that their concept of equinox coincided with 
ours; and finally, that they could predict the date of the equinox accurately (i.e. to 
within a day). These assumptions are less tenable. Although the equinox has become one of 
the celestial events archaeoastronomers always consider as potential targets for 
alignments, the number of culturally contextualized and widely recognized cases is 
remarkably small. And there are good reasons for that since the equinoxes, unlike the 
solstices, are neither observable nor empirically obvious, but rather require a conceptual
 toolbox to calculate, and therefore predict, the date of their occurrence. This makes 
 their universalization a highly problematic and hotly-debated topic within cultural 
 astronomy, which has recently been reiterated in an [open access reprint](https://journals.equinoxpub.com/index.php/JSA/article/view/33312) of Clive L. N. 
 Ruggles’ paper ‘Whose Equinox?’, with a [modern postscript](https://journals.equinoxpub.com/index.php/JSA/article/view/33312) by the same scholar.

The problem is that the equinox as we currently define it, is the moment at which the sun 
crosses the celestial equator. This is a modern mathematical and astronomical abstraction 
which cannot be empirically observed or measured, let alone predicted without recourse to,
 as Ruggles put it (p.129), ‘the framework of Greek geometrical astronomy that underlies 
 the Western scientific tradition […]. But from the perspective of a totally different 
 world-view devoid of these underlying geometrical concepts, finding an explanation of 
 “our” equinox would be far from simple, and possibly it could make no sense at all.’ 
 There are a number of ways in which “an” equinox can be obtained, for instance by either 
 (1) finding the spatial mid-point between the rising (or setting) position of the sun at 
 the solstices; (2) finding the half-way moment in time between the two solstices and 
 aiming for sunrise (or set) on that day; (3) finding the day sunrise and sunset occur in 
 exactly opposite directions; or (4) finding the day on which the length of time between 
 sunrise and sunset is roughly the same as between sunset and sunrise. None of methods 
 gives an accurate estimate of it – the only exception being method (1) when conducted 
 from a location with a perfectly flat horizon – making them unusable in combination with 
 Dash’s method.

It is dubious whether the ancient Egyptians had, or even cared about, the notion of an 
equinox (see, for example, the discussion on the eastern family of Ancient Egyptian temple
 orientations [here](http://www.iac.es/proyecto/arqueoastronomia/media/Belmonte_Shaltout_Chapter_8_I.pdf)). Assuming that other societies had the notion of equinox falls under 
 the “sins” of [ethnocentrism](http://www.oxfordbibliographies.com/view/document/obo-9780199766567/obo-9780199766567-0045.xml) and anachronism, the uncalled-for projection of modern 
 western biases unto other societies, past or present – something that has plagued 
 archaeoastronomical studies from early on, with the uncontextualized claims of 
 ‘astronomer-priests’ and ‘prehistoric observatories’. But this isn’t the only problem.

## Fallacious claims
In [_On Sophistical Refutations_](https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/a/aristotle/sophistical/index.html) Aristotle identified thirteen fallacies of logic, one of 
which became known as ‘affirming the consequent’, ‘converse error’ or ‘confusion of 
necessity and sufficiency’. It results when a necessary condition is mistaken for a 
sufficient condition and then, in the presence of the necessary (but not sufficient) 
condition the consequent is invalidly affirmed. Let’s look at an example from Aristotle:

> If it has been raining, then the ground is wet.
> The ground is wet.
> Therefore, it has been raining.

This is not necessarily true, since there are a number of other possible reasons for the 
ground to be wet. Let’s take just one more example, this time from [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Affirming_the_consequent), which will 
perhaps make the fallacy more obvious: 

> If Bill Gates owns Fort Knox, then Bill Gates is rich.
> Bill Gates is rich.
> Therefore, Bill Gates owns Fort Knox.

The two premises are obviously true, but the conclusion is, equally obviously, false. This
 same fallacy exists even if we replace these words with others, for example:

> If the Great Pyramid was aligned using the equinoctial gnomon method, 
then using the equinoctial gnomon method I will observe similar errors.
> I observe similar errors.
> Therefore, the Great Pyramid was aligned using the equinoctial gnomon method.

The logical fallacy is still present – all I did was swap some words to form new 
statements, the logical structure remains the same – but it is now more obvious to spot. 
No amount of experimental work or increased accuracy of a method (any method) will ever 
make this anything but a logical fallacy. And this is because what Dash demonstrated – 
the high accuracy of his method – is a necessary but not sufficient condition. In other 
words, we know the Egyptians used a high-accuracy method, and so any proposed method must 
feature such levels of accuracy. High-accuracy is therefore a necessary condition to 
accept the method was used by the ancient Egyptians, but it is not sufficient. There are a
 host of other methods with similar levels of accuracy, as indeed Dash highlights. They 
 may, or may not, be as simple as his but some of them have something that Dash’ 
 hypothesis lacks: cultural and historical context (more on this below).

In fairness to Dash he is not the first one to fall for this fallacy, it seems to be a 
recurring theme in archaeoastronomical claims. There are many examples to pick from, but I
 would like to refer to one of the most famous and also one which brought archaeoastronomy
  to the public’s attention in the late 1960s: the idea that the Aubrey Holes at 
  Stonehenge could be used as an eclipse predictor. This idea was first posited by Gerald 
  Hawkins in a Nature journal article titled ‘Stonehenge: a Neolithic computer’ (1964). 
  Hawkins saw the 56 Aubrey holes as a giant dial, where by moving a number of stones one 
  hole each year, ‘this simple operation will predict accurately every important lunar 
  event for hundreds of years’ (1964: 1259), including the prediction of eclipses. Fred 
  Hoyle (1966), the famous astronomer, later highlighted some issues in Hawkins’ treatment
   but proposed a simpler method which required only four stones, representing the moon, 
   the sun and the two lunar nodes. These, when moved around the Aubrey holes circle 
   following set rules, allow for eclipses to be predicted, including ones that were not 
   observable from Stonehenge. These notions were, and still are, criticized by 
   archaeologists and archaeoastronomers alike (e.g. Hawkes 1967, Ruggles 1999), but 
   rather than repeat those arguments I want to merely highlight the logical fallacy that 
   is at the core of such argumentation:

> If the Aubrey Holes were built to predict eclipses, 
then I would be able to use them to predict eclipses.
> I am able to use them to predict eclipses.
> Therefore, the Aubrey Holes were built to predict eclipses.

Well, not quite. Students of mine at TSD will remember me calling this “Hawkins’ fallacy” 
in a number of lectures, where I more succinctly tried to impress on them the following 
rule-of-thumb: “just because I can see something there today, it doesn’t automatically 
mean it was built for that purpose back then”.

## Did Occam ever cut himself shaving?
Returning to Dash, and to his credit, he is never so bold as to explicitly make such a 
claim. He rather leaves it implied in his own short conclusion (p. 7):

> “As to the methods they actually did use, the Egyptians, unfortunately, left us few clues.
 […] Nonetheless, among our choices, the equinoctial solar gnomon method has a certain 
 appeal. It produces results that match the actual alignments of the largest pyramids of 
 the pyramid age in magnitude and direction. It is also the ‘Occam’s Razor’ candidate. It 
 is hard to imagine a method that could be simpler either conceptually or in practice.”

Rather than construct a carefully crafted and historically contextualized argument for his
 method, for example with recourse to what little is known of ancient Egyptian 
 architectural techniques, he prefers to invoke [Occam’s razor](https://www.britannica.com/topic/Occams-razor). This principle, also known 
 as the principle of unnecessary plurality, states that among a set of solutions the 
 simplest one is the most likely one. Aristotle, who was probably the first to posit this 
 principle in his _Posterior Analytics_, wrote: ‘_Other things being equal_, we may assume the
  superiority of the demonstration which derives from fewer postulates or hypotheses’ 
  (emphasis mine).

As Dash suggests that ‘it is hard to imagine a method that could be simpler either 
conceptually or in practice’ it is no wonder that he appeals to Occam’s principle. But 
Dash hasn’t taken into account the ethnocentric assumptions we highlighted above regarding
 the equinox. Indeed, when comparing his method to some of the others, _other things are 
 not equal_, for Dash doesn’t attempt to socio-historically contextualize, or even argue, 
 for his method, whereas other scholars have done exactly that.

In fact, Dash ignores a number of other methods proposed by scholars through the ages. I’d
 especially like to focus on one proposed in 2001 by Juan Antonio Belmonte, published in 
 the _Journal for the History of Astronomy_ and freely available online [here](http://articles.adsabs.harvard.edu/cgi-bin/nph-iarticle_query?db_key=AST&bibcode=2001JHAS...32....1B&letter=0&classic=YES&defaultprint=YES&whole_paper=YES&page=1&epage=1&send=Send+PDF&filetype=.pdf). It is a simple
  adjustment to Kate Spence’s method of simultaneous transit with added historical context
   based on Ancient Egyptian iconography and cosmology. In this method, the cardinal 
   directions are not identified from an East-West line, as in Dash’s method, but from a 
   North-South line. This could have been done during the Old Kingdom, my observing the 
   simultaneous transit of the stars Megrez and Phekda or Ursa Major – that is by 
   identifying when these two stars were perfectly vertical, which they only did when 
   crossing, or transiting, the meridian line. When this happens, the line formed by these
    stars, when extended down to the horizon, will mark the North point. 

 Figure 2 goes here

To ensure high accuracy, a tool or instrument is needed and for this Belmonte looked at 
both the Ancient Egyptian texts and iconography. The Stretching of the Cord ceremony, 
engraved on the walls of the Temple of Horus at Edfu, describes how the foundations of a 
temple were established. In them, the King says (pp. S6-S7):
	
> ‘I have grasped the stake along with the handle of the mallet. I take the measuring cord 
in the company of Seshat. I observe the progressive movement of the stars. My eye is now 
fixed upon _Meskhet(yu)_. The god of time-keeping stands by me, in front of his merkhet. 
Then, I have established the four corners of your temple.’

As was typical of the Ancient Egyptians, theology and functionality were merged in the 
language of monumental inscriptions. Nevertheless, the linkage between this ceremony, the
 goddess Seshat and the observation of _Meskhetyu_ is made quite clear in this, and other, 
 inscriptions. _Meskhetyu_, the Bull’s Foreleg, is the northern constellation par excellence
  in Egyptian cosmology and corresponds exactly to the modern asterism of the Big Dipper, 
  in Ursa Major, where we find the stars Megrez and Phekda.

Belmonte has further suggested that ‘originally, the Seshat sign [the goddess’ headdress] 
might in fact have been a device (a high pole or flagstaff, similar to those put in front 
of the temples and chapels, with a pair of parallel stakes on top) to observe the upper 
meridian culminations of stars near the Pole, whose exact position would be indicated by 
the seven-point star’ (p.S15). In a further refinement of this hypothesis, [Belmonte, 
Molinero Polo and Miranda](http://iac.es/proyecto/arqueoastronomia/media/Belmonte_Shaltout_Chapter_7.pdf) have suggested the two-dimensional seven-pointed star might have
 represented a horizontal eight-pointed star that, once the alignment with Megrez and 
 Phekda was conducted, would automatically yield the cardinal and cross-cardinal 
 directions.

 Figure 3 goes here

This method involves three assumptions: 1) that the Egyptians were aware of Megrez and 
Phekda; 2) that they noticed its relation to North; and 3) that they had the instrumental 
means to take advantage of it. Belmonte, in his article, convincingly argues for all these
 points with recourse to what is known from the Ancient Egyptians themselves, namely: 1) 
 the important role of the constellation of _Meskhetyu_; 2) its relation to the north; and 
 made a case for 3) the Seshat headdress, which features in the foundation ritual of 
 ancient Egyptian temples, as an instrument that would aid in establishing the directions. 

There are other reasons why this hypothesis is more palatable. Firstly, it could be 
employed almost every night in the year (particularly if both lower and upper culmination 
are considered) whereas Dash’s can only be used on two days in the year – the equinoxes. 
Furthermore, axial precession and proper motion continuously moved the stars from their 
positions meaning that the accuracy of this method fluctuated during the Old Kingdom. 
Belmonte’s analysis suggests that the fluctuation in the method’s error tracked the d
eviation from true cardinality in the Fourth Dynasty pyramids, and that overwhelming 
error margins were the reason behind a change of method in the early Fifth Dynasty. 

All in all, both Dash’s and Belmonte’s hypothesis make a similar number of assumptions, 
but Belmonte’s requires fewer speculative leaps since most of the assumptions are 
substantiated by a careful reading of the historical and iconographic records whereas 
Dash’s assumptions remain unargued and unproven.


## In Conclusion
Occam’s razor has become a banner behind which sceptics counter fantastic claims while 
creationists counter Darwinian evolution ([see here](http://skepdic.com/occam.html)). It finds a natural home in the exact 
and mathematical sciences. With this I don’t mean to say that it cannot be used in the 
Humanities – it most certainly can. But in order to apply it correctly, we need to make 
sure all the assumptions in the hypotheses being contrasted are identified and exposed –  
we need to ensure that _all other things are indeed equal_. Only then can one ask oneself 
what constitutes “the simplest solution”. Is it a method that is technically simple to 
implement but conceptually biased and lacking in socio-historical context? Or an arguably 
even simpler method that is based on concepts that are grounded in the beliefs, practices 
and iconography of the society under study? To avoid the fallacious affirmation of the 
consequent requires that we become reflexive, that we acknowledge and identify the 
assumptions we are bringing to our claims, especially those that we unconsciously and 
anachronistically project unto other societies. That is the duty of skyscape archaeology.


## Find Out More
Aristotle, 350 BCE. On Sophistical Refutations. Available online [here](http://classics.mit.edu/Aristotle/sophist_refut.html)
Aristotle, 350 BCE. Posterior Analytics. Available online [here](http://classics.mit.edu/Aristotle/posterior.html)
Bernadette Brady, 2012. ‘The Egyptian ascension mythology of the Old Kingdom and the phenomenon of star phases’. In H. A. El Gawad, N. Andrews, M. Correas-Amador, V. Tamorri and J. Taylor (eds), 2012. Current Research in Egyptology 2011. Oxford: Oxbow Books, pp. 40-47. 
Juan A. Belmonte, 2001. ‘On the Orientation of Old Kingdom Egyptian Pyramids’. Journal for the History of Astronomy, Archaeoastronomy supplement no. 26: S1-S20. Available online [here](http://articles.adsabs.harvard.edu/cgi-bin/nph-iarticle_query?db_key=AST&bibcode=2001JHAS...32....1B&letter=0&classic=YES&defaultprint=YES&whole_paper=YES&page=1&epage=1&send=Send+PDF&filetype=.pdf)
Juan A. Belmonte and Mosalam Shaltout (eds), 2009. In Search of Cosmic Order: Selected Essays on Egyptian Archaeoastronomy. Cairo: Supreme Council of Antiquities Press.
Juan A. Belmonte, M.A.M. Polo and N. Miranda, 2009. ‘Unveiling Seshat: New Insights into the Stretching of the Cord Ceremony’. In J. A. Belmonte and M. Shaltout (eds), 2009. In Search of Cosmic Order: Selected Essays on Egyptian Archaeoastronomy. Cairo: Supreme Council of Antiquities Press, pp. 197-212. Available online [here](http://iac.es/proyecto/arqueoastronomia/media/Belmonte_Shaltout_Chapter_7.pdf)
Raymond O. Faulkner, 1966. ‘The King and the Star-Religion in the Pyramid Texts’. Journal of Near Eastern Studies 25(3): 153-161. Available online [here](http://www.jstor.org/stable/543263)
Glen Dash, 2017. ‘Occam’s Egyptian razor: the equinox and the alignment of the pyramids’. The Journal of Ancient Egyptian Architecture 2: 1-8. Available online [here](http://www.egyptian-architecture.com/JAEA2/JAEA2_Dash)
Jacqueta Hawkes, 1967. ‘God in the Machine’. Antiquity 41: 174-180.
Gerald Hawkins, 1964. ‘Stonehenge: A Neolithic Computer’. Nature 202: 1258-1261.
Fred Hoyle, 1966. ‘Stonehenge-An Eclipse Predictor’. Nature 211: 454-456.
Martin Isler, 1991. ‘The Gnomon in Egyptian Antiquity’. Journal of the American Research Center in Egypt 28: 155-185. Available online [here](http://www.jstor.org/stable/40000578)
Mark Lehner, 2008. The Complete Pyramids: Solving the Ancient Mysteries. London and New York: Thames & Hudson. Available online [here](https://archive.org/details/MarkLehner.......TheCompletePyramids)
Clive L. N. Ruggles, 1999. Astronomy in Prehistoric Britain and Ireland. New Haven and London: Yale University Press.
Clive L. N. Ruggles, 2017 [1997]. ‘Whose Equinox?’ Journal of Skyscape Archaeology 3(1): 127-131. Available online [here](https://journals.equinoxpub.com/index.php/JSA/article/view/33312)
Clive L. N. Ruggles, 2017. ‘Still Whose Equinox?’ Journal of Skyscape Archaeology 3(1): 132-135. Available online [here](https://journals.equinoxpub.com/index.php/JSA/article/view/33329)
Sarah Symons, 1999. Ancient Egyptian astronomy: timekeeping and cosmography in the new kingdom. PhD Dissertation: University of Leicester. Available online [here](https://lra.le.ac.uk/handle/2381/8546)
